Hi there.
This is true.
In the last lesson we have seen how interfaces are typically used.
So we pretty much understand when to use interfaces.
But the question is why interfaces were used and why are abstract classes not used instead?
So we are going to follow the advice from an effective Java item which addresses this question.
Here is item 18 from effective Java, which recommends that we should prefer interfaces over abstract
classes.
We will also look at the scenarios when we should use abstract classes.
Let's see when we should prefer interfaces.
The item says that interfaces are ideal for defining mixes.
Let's see why that's the case.
We know that makes sense are additional capabilities.
That is, they are like add ons.
Which classes might want to support since make sense are additional capabilities a class might want
to support multiple of them.
Now, if we use an abstract class to define a mixing, then it cannot be used by all those classes that
already extend some other class and that some other class could as well be a mixing.
So with abstract classes as makes sense, a class can at max support only one mixing.
But if interface is used, then we wouldn't have any such limitations.
All we need to do is just add implements class to the class declaration and implement the methods in
the new interface.
So it is easy to modify an existing class that's already extending some other class.
Now, if the type is defining representative behavior but with no state involved, then go for interface.
Just recall that interfaces are stateless and hence is preferred in this case.
But ensure that even in future you wouldn't need any state to be part of this super type.
You can, of course, create an abstract class with only abstract methods, but again, it cannot be
used by classes that are already extending some other class.
So the key reason to go for Interface is Java not supporting multiple inheritance.
So the question is when should we prefer abstract classes?
If the type is defining core identity of its subclasses, then you should go with abstract class or
even a regular concrete class.
When we say core identity, it would be representative behavior with state.
You cannot use an interface here as interface we know as stateless.
We know that our bookmark class is defined as an abstract class as it represents the core identity of
its subclasses.
Specifically, it defines state using protected variables such as ID title description and profile URL.
Item also says that abstract classes can be used to provide a skeletal implementation of the interface.
That is, they would implement the interface and would provide some form of basic implementation.
Skeleton implementations provide implementation assistance to programmers.
That is, programmers can extend the skeletal implementation and make use of some of the implementation.
That is, programmers would not have to reinvent the logic, thus saving them some time and also any
potential bugs that they may introduce.
Of course, programmers are also free to ignore skeletal implementation and implement the interface
themselves.
Here is an example from the Java library where the class array list from the Java utility package is
implementing four interfaces and is also extending abstract lists, which is a skeletal implementation
of the list interface.
So ArrayList is taking advantage of some of the functionality that comes with abstract lists.
Java API provides such skeletal implementations for several interfaces, especially if you look at Java
util package, you will find several interfaces with skeletal implementations.
Looking at this hierarchy, you may wonder why ArrayList has to specifically implement a list interface
as abstract list is already doing it.
It is definitely not required to explicitly implement list in this case, but I would assume it is done
for the sake of code clarity to just show that ArrayList is indeed a list.
This way you don't have to browse through the inheritance tree to learn about this fact.
As for the naming convention goes, skeletal implementations start with the keyword abstract followed
by the interface name like in the case of abstract list.
You may want to recall that in our interfaces demo we had an interface named A which had an abstract
subclass named Abstract A, which is basically a skeletal implementation and it also provided implementation
for one of the inherited abstract methods.
And there was also the concrete Class X which extended this abstract skeletal class.
So we already implemented a skeletal implementation, and abstract classes are great candidates for
such implementations.
Finally, the item says that we need to use utmost care while designing our interfaces.
If the code you write is used only within your organisation, then most likely you are fine.
But if you are designing a public API, then you should brainstorm quite a bit on the method signatures.
Once the API is released and widely used, it would be extremely difficult to make any changes.
That is, if you add any new methods in one of your interfaces in a subsequent release, then any client
code that implements this interface will not compile anymore unless it implements the new methods.
But if clients do not recompile their code, then they are fine and their code still works with your
new code.
Assuming that you have used the same version of the compiler as before, that is, you did not use a
different version of the compiler to compile your new code.
But if the clients do try to recompile, then they will see compilation errors.
You may recall this illustration from the previous lesson where list interface in standard Java API
is implemented by other popular APIs.
Now if this interface is modified, then it could break the code in both these APIs and that would be
a very serious issue.
In this context, the item says that if your type would evolve over time, then you should go for abstract
classes.
That's because with abstract classes, if we add new concrete methods, they are automatically inherited
by subclasses.
However, this recommendation is valid only up until Java seven, as from Java eight onwards.
Even interfaces permit adding of new concrete methods which get automatically inherited.
So ease of evolving is not much of an issue from Java eight onwards.
However, adding abstract methods or changing method signatures of existing abstract methods would still
break the code of all implementers.
So even with Java eight, you should still be careful while designing your interfaces.
So that's about it.
Just to summarize, use interfaces if you want to define make sense or if you want to define representative
behavior of subclasses but with no state involved.
The core reason for this is Java not supporting multiple inheritance of classes.
If representative behavior with state is what is needed, then abstract crosses should be used.
Also, abstract classes are great for providing skeletal implementations.
That's about it.
And thank you.